---
layout: post
title: KEGG Database Mining
subtitle: Connecting Metagenomics and Metabolomics
gh-repo: awbrooks19
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [kegg]
comments: true
---

A compuational approach connecting metagenomic and metabolomic datasets using the KEGG database.

### Motivation

In microbiome research, many studies are now combining metagenomic shotgun sequencing to quantify microbial taxon and their genetic repertoire
with metabolic profiles quantifying the abundance of biomolecules. This is an important step because it brings together microbiome charicterization
with direct measures of functional output. However, each of these datasets are profiled in very different ways, follow very different statistical distributions, and pose unique data analysis challenges.

### Question and Hypothesis

**Question**: By leveraging annotated connections in the KEGG database between biomolecules and the enzymes that metabolize them,
can metagenomics and metabolomics datasets be united into useful graphical network models?

**Hypothesis**: Metagenomic datasets will be able to predict metabolomic profiles in these models, and vice-versa.
 

### General Approach

#### What is KEGG?

KEGG stands for the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, but it may be best known for it's thorough collections of metabolic pathways.
[The KEGG Database](https://www.genome.jp/kegg/) is an organized hierarchical collection of biological systems and how they are interconnected. 
When I say 'organized hierarchical collection' I am refering to the way in which KEGG links together information, known as an **ontological system**.

In the **ontological system** KEGG has created, everything is treated as an object in the larger collection, whether it is a metabolite, gene, reaction, disease, or pathway.
In turn, each of these objects is linked to other objects based on composing or being a component of the other objects.
As an example: a metabolic pathway will be linked to the reactions which compose it's many steps, and each of those reactions will be linked to the metabolites being converted and the enzymes catalyzing that reaction. 

Due the the hierarchical and interconnected format, KEGG is quite ammenable to network analyses.
In fact they have some great tools available to paying customers to perform different types of network analyses within their database. 
However, they have made all of the underlying database available on the internet. 
With that in mind, combined with my desire to have complete control and flexibility with the system we create, 
I will discuss my approach to mining KEGG from the internet and constructing my own network.

*I encourage people to support KEGG by buying a membership if you can afford it. This post is meant to educate on data scrapping from the internet, constructing networks, and layering multiple large datasets together. KEGG however is the result of thousands of hours of manual annotation and effort, and while it is a perfect database to use for this post, I do not intend for this to replace fees from regular users which support it's creation and maintanance.*
 

#### How to Access KEGG?



```python
# FUNCTION TO PARSE KEGG ENTRY

def kegg_import(query):
    """
    Parse KEGG flat files into a dictionary of strings.
    
    :param query: the query object
    :type query: str
    :return: similarity score
    :rtype: dict[section] = [value1, value2]

    :Example:
        >>> kegg_parse('path:hsa00010')   
    """
    # OUTPUT DICTIONARY #
    out_dict = {}
    
    # PULL THE KEGG FILE AND LOOP LINE BY LINE #
    for line in REST.kegg_get(query).read().rstrip().split("\n"):

        # TRY TO PULL OUT SECTION HEADERS #
        section = line[:12].strip()
        
        # CHECK IF ACTUAL HEADER #
        if not section == "":
            if not section == "///":
                
                # SET CURRENT SECTION #
                current_section = section
                
                # ADD TO DICT IF SECTION IS NEW #
                if current_section not in out_dict.keys():
                    out_dict[current_section] = []
                    
        # ADD DATA TO DICT #
        out_dict[current_section].append(line[12:].rstrip())

    return out_dict
```
